RTAX: Rapid and accurate taxonomic classification of short paired-end
      sequence reads from the 16S ribosomal RNA gene.

David A. W. Soergel (1) and Rob Knight (2)

1 Department of Plant and Microbial Biology,
  University of California, Berkeley 
2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Chemistry 
  and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Corresponding author (current address): soergel@cs.umass.edu

Version 0.9  (September 17, 2011)

http://dev.davidsoergel.com/rtax


Requirements
------------

 * BioPerl.  See http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Installing_Bioperl_for_Unix,
	particularly the "Easy install using CPAN" section.
	(we use only Bio::Index::Fasta so the many optional BioPerl
	dependencies are not needed).
	
 * Getopt::Long ("sudo cpan Getopt::Long")

 * USEARCH (http://www.drive5.com/usearch/).  RTAX has been tested with
    v4.1.93 and v5.0.144.  Make sure that the program is in your search
    path as "usearch", or provide its path explicitly in the "rtax" script.

* A reference database consisting of sequences for which taxonomy assignments
    are known.  We provide prepared versions of the GreenGenes database on the
    RTAX web site; see the GreenGenes section below for details.

    Two files are needed:
    1. a FASTA file containing the sequences, and 
    2. a file listing taxonomy strings for each sequence ID found in the 
         FASTA file.  The format of this file is

sequenceid	pcidwidth	kingdom; phylum; class; order; ...

         one entry per line, where sequenceid, pcidwidth, and the taxonomy
         string are separated by a single tab, and the taxonomy string itself is
         delimited either by semicolons or by tabs.  The pcidwidth column is
         optional, and (if present) is ignored in the current version of RTAX
         anyway.  (In our usage, we cluster the reference database into 99% id
         OTUs, representing each by a single "seed" sequence.  This column then
         lists the largest pairwise %id difference between the cluster seed
         and any cluster member.)


Installation
------------

RTAX consists of a set of perl scripts and a shell script ("rtax") to wire them together.  No compilation is needed; just extract the package to a convenient location.

The perl scripts must remain in the "scripts" directory below the "rtax" shell script, but the latter can be symlinked anywhere for convenience.  A common pattern might be to place the whole package at /usr/local/rtax, and then symlink the script into your path (e.g., "ln -s /usr/local/rtax/rtax /usr/local/bin").


Running RTAX
------------

Sequence classification is done as follows:

    rtax gg.nr.fasta gg.nr.taxonomy queryA.fasta [queryB.fasta] > classifications.out 

Substitute a different reference database for the GreenGenes files if desired, of course.

Note that the two query files must provide mate-paired reads with exactly
matching identifiers (though they need not be in the same order).  Any ids
present in one file but not the other are silently dropped.  Please contact
us for help accomodating alternate naming schemes for the paired reads
(e.g., "SOMEID.a" paired with "SOMEID.b", and so forth).

RTAX may be run for single-ended reads as well; simply exclude the queryB
parameter in this case.

Various progress messages are provided on stderr, and the predicted classification for each query is provided on stdout.  The output format is essentially the same as the taxonomy file input format above.  The second column indicates the best %id observed between the query sequence and any reference sequence, and the taxonomy string is tab-delimited.

Temporary files are created in ./rtax.SOMENUMBER below the working directory.  These can be quite large; if more space is available in another location (e.g., under /tmp), edit the "tempdir" variable in the rtax script appropriately.  The temporary directory is deleted upon successful termination, but may need to be manually cleaned up in the event of an error of some sort.

In addition, an index into the input FASTA file is written in the same directory as the file itself.



Preparing the GreenGenes reference database
-------------------------------------------

An RTAX-formatted reference database based on GreenGenes (version of May 31, 2011) is available at http://dev.davidsoergel.com/rtax/greengenes.reference.20110531.tgz.  That contains gg.nr.fasta and gg.nr.taxonomy, which are the result of clustering the GreenGenes input file at 98.5% identity, finding consensus taxonomy strings for each cluster, and formatting the result as needed for use with RTAX.

To regenerate these files (e.g. with a newer GreenGenes version): download the complete GreenGenes database to a disk with at least 20GB free space (as of Sep 2011, but GreenGenes is growing rapidly):

    wget http://greengenes.lbl.gov/Download/Sequence_Data/Greengenes_format/greengenes16SrRNAgenes.txt.gz

Then, while in the directory containing the downloaded .txt.gz file, run prepare-greengenes.  (If usearch is not in your path, use "prepare-greengenes /path/to/usearch").  This takes a couple of hours and about 4GB of memory.  Go out for coffee and whatnot.  When you get back, you'll find two files have been produced: gg.nr.fasta and gg.nr.taxonomy.

Note that the free (32-bit) version of USEARCH can use at most 2GB memory on some systems and at most 4GB memory on others.  2GB memory is not sufficient to cluster the current version of GreenGenes, and 4GB barely suffices.  Thus, GreenGenes will soon be too large to cluster at 99% id using USEARCH without a paid 64-bit license.  (Note that USEARCH reports "2.0 GB available" even if in fact 4GB are available, so don't be discouraged until it actually crashes.)  When 4GB is also insufficient, and lacking a paid USEARCH license, a possible strategy will be to cluster at lower %id thresholds.  This requires less memory and produces a smaller, less fine-grained reference database.  We have not explored the impact of doing this on classification performance.




Preparing a non-GreenGenes reference database
---------------------------------------------

You can certainly use different databases, or GreenGenes clustered by different means or with different parameters (or not at all, though this approach will have poor performance).  If you have any trouble producing the reference fasta and taxonomy files in the required format, examine the prepare-greengenes script for hints, and feel free to contact us for help.



Plumbing
--------

Taxonomy assignment proceeds in two phases, which we implement separately:

1.  For each query sequence (or mate pair), find an appropriate set of matching
	hits in a reference database.  This is implemented as rtaxSearchSingle
	and rtaxSearchPair for single and paired-end reads, respectively.

2.  Find consensus taxonomy among each set of reference hits.  This is
	implemented as rtaxVote.

3.  Finally the detailed rtaxVote results are filtered and cleaned up 
    for output.
